In climates that have high moisture and freezing temperatures, outside doors and locks can freeze.

This problem is caused by air leaks from inside to outside, taking moist internal air through broken seals or locks without moisture barriers.  The result is, the warm, moist air cools off and the moisture becomes ice which eventually builds up and prevents the locks from turning, even preventing keys to be inserted into the locks, and also freezes the doors to the jams.

A solution, which can be temporary or long term, depending on door use and temperature / moisture differential, is to use moisture displacement technologies.

For locks, using a lock de-icer can generally solve the immediate problem.  Because the melting point of the common, main ingredient, which is usually ethyl alcohol, is lower than -35C, it can help melt the ice that already exists.  This also displaces the moisure, so once it is melted, it drips away from the lock mechanism and helps prevent moisture from settling on this newly coated surfaces.  Amonia is another solution, so using a spray bottle with cold weather windshield washer fluid can also be used.

These solutions can be short term, though.  Alcohol and amonia evaporates away, so it no longer displaces the moisture.  So in this case, a secondary preventative measure is to apply a water displacing film and fluid into the lock.  Generally, a hinge lubricant or an anti-sieze component can be used.  There are many different commercial products that can do this.  They are usually petroleum or mineral oil based.  A vegetable oil can also be used, although these can cause other problems.

These commercially available moisture displacement compounds are often developed to be fluid and useful in cold weather.  Vegetable oils do not have ingredients to do that.  So in cold temperatures and on cold surfaces, they will gel and freeze and therefore cause the same problem that is to be solved.  Also, vegetable oils can oxidize and become rancid, so can produce a very bad smell over time.  Finally, vegetable oils will hold dust and dirt it comes in contact with.  As it collects dust and dirt, the lubricating properties disappear and again can plug up the lock.  That's not to say that it does not work, just that there are problems that can occur through their use that must be kept in mind.

Around the door jam, lock de-icer or low temp windshield washer fluding can be used to melt the ice.  Just as readily, if the door is not frozen closed, using mechanical measures to remove the ice might be more effective.  No wasted fluid and the mechanical removal helps keep the surfaces dry for working.  In some cases, using hot water can temporarily thaw a lock or frozen door, the problem with that solution is that using water requires the lock and surface to be dried immediately after the lock or door releases, otherwise the water will freeze again and the problem remains.

Heating can work to thaw a lock or door jam but again, it thaws the water but does not displace it, so once the door or jam gets back to freezing temperature, the problem re-occurs.

For door jams, appling the same water displacing oils to the door and the jam will help prevent moisture from accumulating on these surfaces and will prevent this problem from happening over longer periods of time.  It also is nice that it reduces friction, so the door or lock is smoother during use, while the film exists.  It will wear off over time, so be mindful and re-apply the oil if it appears the problem could occur again.

Thankfully, this problem normally only happens during extremely cold times, which are not often long term.  So hopefully this will only ever be needed for a week or two at a time, perhaps once or twice per winter.
