The most simple recipe for rice would generally be:
1 part raw, dried rice
2 parts water

May include:
+ pinches of salt to taste
+ butter / oil rubbed inside cooking pot to prevent sticking

+ also possible flavourings such as dried and ground garlic, oninion, cumin, tumerac, etc.

Often, the stovetop in single sauce pan / pot is the method for cooking rice.  You may want to rinse rice in order to remove excess starch or chaff.  One or to full rinses should do the trick.

Certain rice varieties may require a little more or less water, depending on how dry the rice is or how much moisture the rice is capable of absorbing, which may be the same thing.  Remember that if the rice appears cooked to desired texture, excess water can be poured off and the rice kept warm to evaporate excess.

It is generally accepted practice to bring water to boil first, prior to turning down heat to simmer.

When cooking a single cup of rice, the rice may be ready as early as 18 minutes after simmering begins.  More rice may take longer to fully cook.  1 cup of rice may likely make about 2.5 cups of cooked rice.

Once desired firmness is achieved, remove from heat and leave covered for a few minutes to "steam" a bit more.

Remove lid,. fluff and let rest to "dry" a bit.

For brown rice (medium or long grain), cook time for 1 cup is likely to be around 45 minutes.  You may wish to "roast" rice slightly in oil, in same pan as cooking, prior to adding water.  Remove from heat a let stand another 10 minutes, for sure.  Brown rice is not likely to require a "dry" time after fluffing.

Wild rice isn't actually of the rice family.  Cook time should be at least 45 minutes for a cup of rice.  Use ample water as excess is drained off once fully cooked.  Ratio of 1:4 rice:water shouid be sufficient.  The majority of the rice should be split open when cooked.  Drain off remaining liquid and rice can be used immediately, without resting.

From:
https://www.thekitchn.com/how-to-cook-wild-rice-on-the-stovetop-198709
Wild rice dishes can be complimented with bacon; sautéed onions; fresh herbs such as thyme, parsley, or sage; dried fruits, such as apricot or cherries; and nuts, such as almonds, hazelnuts, and pistachios.

Using a slow cooker:
Rice can be cooked in a slow cooker on the low setting.  Depending on volume, it can take anywhere from 1.5 to 2.5 hours.  A clear lid can certainly help to visually determine if the rice is close to ready.

Rice cooking tips from:
https://www.thekitchn.com/how-i-mostly-cured-my-fear-of-cooking-rice-203584

6 Tips for Cooking Rice

1. Rinse within reason. The instructions on many varieties of rice (yes, I always read the instructions so I can verify this is true) call to rinse until the water runs clear. Have you ever tried rinsing sushi rice until the water runs clear? It becomes clearer but never exactly clear. Two or three rinses is enough. Hint — I love using a French press for rinsing small quantities of rice. The plunger helps expel water and ensures nothing slips out.

2. It's OK to pick up the lid. The cardinal rule, or so I thought, when cooking rice was not to pick up the lid and take a look. Doing so will result in ruining the entire dish, exactly like opening a film canister and exposing negatives to light. Right? Wrong. How else will you be able to tell if your flame is too hot and scorching the bottom of the pan or too low and the liquid isn't even simmering? Of course it's best to allow the steam to build up inside, but one or two looks won't harm anything.

3. Check early and often. Now that you've conquered your fear of Picking Up The Lid, don't be afraid to check on the rice way before the instructions tell you it should be done. Maybe the heat needs to be adjusted or it's cooking much faster than you expected. Maybe you used broth instead of water and it's not quite behaving the same way — better to check for these scenarios while they can still be fixed.

4. Let it sit. Once you've tasted the rice and the texture is right, take the lid off and let it sit for a few minutes. Some of the moisture will evaporate and firm up the rice so it doesn't feel too sticky or wet.

5. All is not lost. So you've picked up the lid at the end of the cooking process and the rice didn't quite turn out. Unless the bottom is totally scorched (and even then the rice that didn't get burned may be salvageable), all is not lost. If the rice is not fully cooked but the liquid has been absorbed, add in some more liquid and resume the cooking process. If the rice is fully cooked but still watery, pour as much of the water off as possible and put it back on the stove to allow the moisture to steam off (covered with a lid).

6. Even refrigerated rice can be rescued. Plain rice has a way of hardening and losing moisture once refrigerated. Add the cold rice to a pan with a tablespoon or two of water. Break up the rice with a spoon and cook over low heat, covering with a lid for several minutes. The rice should absorb the moisture and come back to life. 

Different rice such as white, brown, and wild, may require slightly different approaches.

Freezing cooked rice from:
https://www.veetee.com/freeze-cooked-rice/

A: It is best to freeze the rice as soon as possible after cooking. Pack the rice into a microwavable container as soon as it is cooked. When the rice has cooled, seal the container and place into the freezer
