One of the most common concerns about worms are based on their behaviour.  That is, they seem to be trying to escape from your compost bin, either through breathing holes in bin or up through a lid.

This can happen no matter how long you have been vermicomposting, but is of extra concern for the beginner, and this should be resolved as soon as possible to ensure you do not loose your entire stock, if the worms are just not stretching their legs.

In general, the main resaon worms try to escape is because of a lack of oxygen.  This can be caused by too damp of bedding or improper ventilation.  If there is a strong smell in the bin or there is a lot of moisture inside the bin on the sides or lid, then the bin probably needs more ventalation.  Simply make some additional holes for venting.

Of course, this can be caused by too much food in the bin, as well.  Decomposing material will leach off moisture.  Depending on the type of material, the food could have anywhere from 20% moisture to 80% moisture.  The more damp the food, the more moisture will be released into the bin.  Generally, the moisture will absorb into the bedding, but if the bedding is already quite damp, the moisture will evaporate.  Having proper ventalation will help evaporate excess moisture into the atmosphere and not be trapped within the bin in a viscious cycle.

Also, be sure that the worms are actually managing the amount of food you are providing for them.  Although the worms will take care of everything you are putting in the bin, excess food will simply desicate (reduce moiusture) which will end up in the bin and other decomposing activity will occur, giving off excessive amonia smells.  Feed less, more often, to keep a balance.  Keep any excess in a freezer for later use, if necessary.

Aside from ventalation, if the bedding is quite wet, add some browns.  That might be paper, cardboard, or even wood shavings, saw dust, or dry leaves.  This will absorb excess moisture and help manage the bedding.  Of course do not add too much as this may hinder the worms mobility, but certainly incorporate enough to absorb obvious moisture issues.

If you can manage the moisture, you should mostly have happy worms, content to stay within the bin and munching away at the food.

For more information about the causes and how to manage mass escape attempts of your worms, check the following articles:

https://www.thespruce.com/worms-escaping-from-my-vermicompost-bin-2539483

https://unclejimswormfarm.com/why-composting-worms-escape/

https://www.redwormcomposting.com/general-questions/why-are-my-worms-trying-to-escape/
