This file is to contain information that may be valuable and could be catagorized at a later date.

A quick statement of opinion on hydroponics:
 A lot of people believe greatly in the value of hydroponics.  Hydroponics is, of course, growing plants in the absence of soil.
 It is quite possible that the only value of hydroponics is when soil is not available.  This can especially be the case for starting a garden indoors, in the winter months.  Moving soil indoors may not be the most convenient.  Having said that, when you have containers full of water solution at 8lbs per gallon, the additional soil is not going to add significantly to weight nor volume.
 Why might there be little difference between growing plants in soil vs hydroponically?  One of the primary aspects of hydroponics is the intensive nature of the process.  Hydroponics is conducted in a very scientific manner, so nutrients are constantly being monitored.  One could perform this same management in soil, although the absorption of nutrients into soil and a plant's capacity to recover those nutrients may differ.  In that respect, adjusting the nutrients in the soil, considering the nutrients already existing in the soil, is common practice in the agriculture industry.
 One possible negative effect of hydroponics is the very nature of hydroponics.  It is possible that the fast and high absorption of moisture into the plant also results in high water content in the crop, itself. One common method in the agriculture industry in maximizing profit, is to increase the water content of the end product.  The produce looks hydrated and therefore can appear more appealing.  But often produce is sold by weight, and bulking up the food product with water means it weighs more and therefore is higher price per actual nutritional value.  Small, less hydrated produce can have just as much, if not even more nutritional value per pound.
 Hydroponics does not necessarily mean organic.  Hydroponic crops are not necessarily any more nutritionally valuable than soil grown plants.  The nutrients added to the water solution are not necessarily organic, therefore hydroponics is possibly not considered organic, if that is of value to you.  By definition, organic means that no industrial chemical are part of the food chain.  Crystaline fertilizer is generally an industrial produced chemical.  Organic fertilizer is that which is produced by plants and animals in a natural method and applied to the soil used by other plants and animals.
 As mentioned earlier, a benefit of hydroponics is not requiring soil.  Hydroponics does generally mean growing indoors, which is likely to result in less insects mingling with the produce.  This could be beneficial as some insects are pests.  This could also be harmful as some or certain insect contact could be additionally beneficial to crop production, including insects within the soil which could be beneficial to a healthy root system.  Another possible value is the ability to control the growing temperatures.  But with that benefit comes the additional cost of managing that temperature as well as the cost of high humidity in the growing room, which could cause premature damage to the building being used.
 A healthy and natural biomass and environment could likely produce the most nutritionally valuable product.  It can also be the least costly, in time, money, and energy.  All in all, taking advantage of nature to manage crop production may be the most beneficial and least costly method of getting value out of growing your own produce.
