Some notes regarding an open community.

The content in this document may or may not have value or be relevant to creating an open community.  The content is just ideas and thoughts that may or may not be helpful to creating a complete ecological community, or a common interest tribe.

~~~~~~~~~

An open community might best be designed around basic needs.  At the very least, food (and water, of course) is an absolute need.  While we also generally believe that shelter and clothing are a need, in moderate climates those things may not actually be a need.

And with that, a community based on ensuring that everyone has access to at the very least, their minimum caloric intake necessary to live without food insecurity, would be a very minimum goal.

On top of that, clothing and shelter for all community members would be a benefit and so would likely be necessary in the bare minimum design.  Even though these things aren't necessarily an absolute need, succeptibility to environmental exposure as well as personal safety from predatory wildlife are most likely important to ensure that the community population does not live under stress.

Under stress, people have a tendency to live from a survival paradigm, and as such, their own well being and survival are the only important thing in their life, and so are vulnerable to do things that they would otherwise feel is immoral, in order to survive.  A goal of any community should be that most, generally stresses of survival are removed from people's lives, so that they can function in a more thoughtful manner, which is beneficial to the eniire community, or at the very least, are not harmful to the community or its members.

While in general, people live by a frame of common sense, we have a tendency to operate by things that simply make sense, or that have appeared to be successful, in the past.  Those things are the basis and makeup of a species experiental history that becomes instinctual.  As such, people have a tendency to skip steps or jump right into a behaviour, without consideration of whether their new efforts might, or might not, lead to their success.  This is invariably the value of our ability to learn by doing, and by mistakes.  In that case, life is organic, but when designing systems, a system designer does everything to take all things into consideration.  Even things that are common sense, in the event that a system's failure may not be due to the lack of consideation of something that might appear to be common sense, but otherwise is a point of failure that might be either fixed, or at least noted as a potential point of failure.  With that said, some of the information and thoughts in this document or within this directory may point to common sense, but they are being noted specifically to bring these things to light, in order to ensure they are available for consideration in the event that the system fails, as a potential item to be fixed, if necessary.

One thing that does seem to be common sense, is that of doing no harm.  It is an edict that most people appear to live by.  It appears to be common sense, yet it is very often not spoken and sometimes not considered, as we live out our lives, day to day.  It is not the intention to discuss this in this document, other than to bring it to the foreground as at least one of the necessary traits of the members of a community, that enable a community to thrive.  On that idea, if one removes the fears and stresses of the invividuals within a community, it is plausible that a large percentage of intentional harm would not occur, including that of retaliation or vengence, as desires of retaliation and vengence are contexts which result from some prior, perceived harm.

So a community which has its core needs ensured is likely to be a community which has a significantly reduced incidence of intentionally harmful acts.  With that in mind, an intentional community should be designed with the intention of having all members' core needs taken care of, which should generally go a long way to ensure that the do no harm philosophy is upheld.

Harmful acts are often defined and describe as including coersion and force.  People who are coerced and forced to behave certain ways, often act out in defiance of that force.  In that regard, any community should be based on voluntarism.  What that means is no one should fear being forced to behave in certain ways or to contribute to the community in ways that they are not willing to otherwise participate.  There are nuances to this which would be an interesting basis for discussion, but ultimately if there are certain behaviours that a community desires, those behaviours should be voluntarily commited to by the memebers.  Those who do not desire to behave or participate in those ways, would simply be denied from participating in the community.  Exclusion could be described as a form of coersion or force, but that would assume that those who do not agree, do not have an option to live outside communities with behaviours and activities they do not wish to participate in.  If a certain community had a requirement for members to participate in a community defense army, those who did not wish to participate would have the option of leaving the community and join or form a community that did not have that membership requirement.  It is very likely that communities will find that the less membership requirements they have, the more participation and voluntarism they will obtain.


